# APIs and API terminology

This AEP describes the terms used to describe various parts of an API
specification in depth.

## Guidance

### API Name

An API name is a string that **must** uniquely identify the API. It serves as a
namespace where elements of an API are defined, including:

- [resource types](/resource-types)
- [methods](/standard-methods)

In practice, it is difficult to prevent the re-use of the name across different
APIs. Therefore the API should use something, such as the domain name of the
primary server hosting the API and a possible path prefix, as the name.

If a primary server does not exist (for example, a public cloud where every
domain always includes a regional subdomain), then a similar placeholder that
can still ensure uniqueness can be used. For example APIs served at
`{region}.cloud-storage.public-cloud.com` may use
`cloud-storage.public-cloud.com`.

The API Name:

- **must** only use valid domain name characters as specified in
  [RFC 1035](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1035#section-2.3.1), or a
  slash `[.-a-z0-9/]`)
- **must** use all lowercase.
- **must** start with a lowercase letter.
- **should not** use path prefixes that could also be misconstrued as a
  resource collection (e.g. `apis.examples.com/users`)

### API Name Examples

- `networking.istio.io`
- `pubsub.example.com`
- `spanner.example.com/v1`
- `apis.example.com/user` (valid, but discouraged to possible confusion with a
  collection name.).

## API Services

An API service is distinct from an API name: A name is a common string that is
used to define an API agnostic of the address by which it is served, while an
API service is a live service which exposes an API. For example, a staging and
production environment (`staging.service.com`), or different regions
(`us-west.service.com`) may have different API services, but will share the
same API.

In many cases, the address of an API service and an API name may be identical
(for example, an api `api.example.com` may expose that same API at
`api.example.com`).

An API name **must not** be assumed to be an address of an API. Instead, use a
location where that metadata is stored. For example, OpenAPI provides a
[server object](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.1.html#server-object) for
this purpose.
