# Get

In REST APIs, it is customary to make a `GET` request to a resource's URI (for
example, `/v1/publishers/{publisher_id}/books/{book_id}`) in order to retrieve
that resource.

Resource-oriented design AEP-121 honors this pattern through the `Get` method.
These RPCs accept the URI representing that resource and return the resource.

## Guidance

- APIs **must** provide a get method for resources. The purpose of the get
  method is to return data from a single resource.
- Some resources take longer to be retrieved than is reasonable for a regular
  API request. In this situation, the API should use a
  [long-running operation](/long-running-operations).

### Operation

{% sample '../example.proto', 'rpc GetBook' %}

- The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `Get`. The remainder of the RPC
  name **should** be the singular form of the resource's message name.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `Request` suffix.
- The response message **must** be the resource itself. (There is no
  `GetBookResponse`.)
- The HTTP verb **must** be `GET`.
- The URI **should** contain a single variable field corresponding to the
  resource path.
  - This field **should** be called `path`.
  - The URI **should** have a variable corresponding to this field.
  - The `path` field **should** be the only variable in the URI path. All
    remaining parameters **should** map to URI query parameters.
- There **must not** be a `body` key in the `google.api.http` annotation.
- There **should** be exactly one `google.api.method_signature` annotation,
  with a value of `"path"`.

### Requests

{% sample '../example.proto', 'message GetBookRequest' %}

- A resource path field **must** be included. It **should** be called `path`.
  - The field **should** be annotated as `REQUIRED`.
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aep-4] that it
    references.
- The comment for the `path` field **should** document the resource pattern.
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in
  another AEP.

**Note:** The `path` field in the request object corresponds to the `path`
variable in the `google.api.http` annotation on the RPC. This causes the `path`
field in the request to be populated based on the value in the URL when the
REST/JSON interface is used.

### Responses

The response **should** usually include the fully-populated resource unless
there is a reason to return a partial response (see AEP-157).

{% sample '../example.proto', 'message Book' %}

### Errors

If the user does not have sufficient permission to know that the resource
exists, the service **should** reply with an HTTP 404 error, regardless of
whether or not the resource exists. Permission **must** be checked prior to
checking if the resource exists.

If the user has sufficient permission to know that the resource exists, but is
unable to access it, the service **should** reply with an HTTP 403 error.

If the user does have proper permission, but the requested resource does not
exist, the service **must** reply with an HTTP 404 error.

## Interface Definitions

{% sample '../example.proto', 'rpc GetBook' %}

{% sample '../example.proto', 'message GetBookRequest' %}

{% sample '../example.proto', 'message Book' %}

