# Long-running operations

Occasionally, a service may need to expose an operation that takes a
significant amount of time to complete. In these situations, it is often a poor
user experience to simply block while the task runs; rather, it is better to
return some kind of promise to the user, and allow the user to check back in
later.

The long-running request pattern is roughly analogous to a [Future][] in Python
or Java, or a [Node.js Promise][]. Essentially, the user is given a token that
can be used to track progress and retrieve the result.

## Guidance

Operations that might take a significant amount of time to complete:

- **should** return an `Operation` resource that can be used to track the
  status of the request and ultimately retrieve the result.
- **must** match other AEP guidance that would apply to the method otherwise
  (such as status code)

**Note:** User expectations can vary on what is considered "a significant
amount of time" depending on what work is being done. A good rule of thumb is
10 seconds.

### Operation representation

The response to a long-running request **must** be an [`Operation`][Operation].

Protocol buffer APIs **must** use the common component
[`aep.api.Operation`][aep.api.Operation].

### Querying an operation

The service **must** provide an endpoint to query the status of the operation,
which **must** accept the operation path and **should not** include other
parameters:

```http
GET /v1/operations/{operation} HTTP/2
Host: library.example.com
Accept: application/json
```

The endpoint **must** return a `Operation` as described above.

### Standard methods

APIs **may** return an `Operation` from the [`Create`][aep-133],
[`Update`][aep-134], or [`Delete`][aep-135] standard methods if appropriate. In
this case, the `response` field **must** be the standard and expected response
type for that standard method.

When creating or deleting a resource with a long-running request, the resource
**should** be included in [`List`][aep-132] and [`Get`][aep-131] calls;
however, the resource **should** indicate that it is not usable, generally with
a [state enum][aep-216].

### Parallel requests

A resource **may** accept multiple requests that will work on it in parallel,
but is not obligated to do so:

- Resources that accept multiple parallel requests **may** place them in a
  queue rather than work on the requests simultaneously.
- A resource that does not permit multiple requests in parallel (denying any
  new request until the one that is in progress finishes) **must** return
  `ALREADY_EXISTS / 409` if a user attempts a parallel request, and include an
  error message explaining the situation.

### Expiration

APIs **may** allow their operation resources to expire after sufficient time
has elapsed after the request completed.

**Note:** A good rule of thumb for operation expiry is 30 days.

### Errors

Errors that prevent a long-running request from _starting_ **must** return an
[error response][aep-193], similar to any other method.

Errors that occur over the course of a request **may** be placed in the
metadata message. The errors themselves **must** still be represented with a
canonical error object.

## Interface Definitions

When using protocol buffers, the common component
[`aep.api.Operation`][aep.api.Operation] is used.

{% sample 'lro.proto', 'rpc WriteBook' %}

- The response type **must** be `aep.api.Operation`. The `Operation` proto
  definition **should not** be copied into individual APIs; prefer to use a
  single copy (in monorepo code bases), or remote dependencies via a tool like
  [Buf][buf.build].
  - The response **must not** be a streaming response.
- The method **must** include a [`aep.api.operation_info`][lro] annotation,
  which **must** define both response and metadata types.
  - The response and metadata types **must** be defined in the file where the
    RPC appears, or a file imported by that file.
  - If the response and metadata types are defined in another package, the
    fully-qualified message name **must** be used.
  - The response type **should not** be `google.protobuf.Empty` (except for
    [`Delete`][aep-135] methods), unless it is certain that response data will
    _never_ be needed. If response data might be added in the future, define an
    empty message for the RPC response and use that.
  - The metadata type is used to provide information such as progress, partial
    failures, and similar information on each `GetOperation` call. The metadata
    type **should not** be `google.protobuf.Empty`, unless it is certain that
    metadata will _never_ be needed. If metadata might be added in the future,
    define an empty message for the RPC metadata and use that.
- APIs with messages that return `Operation` **must** implement the
  `GetOperation` method of the [`Operations`][lro] service, and **may**
  implement the other methods defined in that service. Individual APIs **must
  not** define their own interfaces for long-running operations to avoid
  inconsistency.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[google.rpc.Status]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/main/google/rpc/status.proto
[lro]: https://github.com/aep-dev/aep-components/blob/main/proto/aep-api/aep/api/operation.proto
[node.js promise]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_promises
[future]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html#concurrent.futures.Future
[Operation]: https://aep.dev/json-schema/type/operation.json
[aep.api.Operation]: https://buf.build/aep/api/docs/main:aep.api#aep.api.Operation
[JSON Schema Operation]: http://aep.dev/json-schema/type/operation.json
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
